docs: vmanomaly part 1 (#5558)
VictoriaMetrics/VictoriaMetrics: docs/anomaly-detection/docs/models/models.md

---
sort: 1.1
weight: 1.1
title: Built-in Models
# disableToc: true
menu:
  docs:
    parent: "models"
    sort: 1.1
    # weight: 1.1
aliases:
  - /anomaly-detection/docs/models/models.html
---

# Models config parameters

## Section Overview
VM Anomaly Detection (`vmanomaly` hereinafter) models support 2 groups of parameters:

- **`vmanomaly`-specific** arguments 

>   - To run wrapper (say, for `model.prophet.ProphetModel`). Defined in *Parameters specific for vmanomaly* sections for each model below.

Reviewer: I don't think the user needs to know why we use specific params. This is about our inner architecture and doesn't affect vmanomaly usage.
These explanations may confuse. I suggest skipping them.

Author: as a tradeoff, changed to 

- **`vmanomaly`-specific** arguments - please refer to *Parameters specific for vmanomaly* and *Default model parameters* subsections for each of the models below.
- Arguments to **inner model** (say, [Facebook's Prophet](https://facebook.github.io/prophet/docs/quick_start.html#python-api)), passed in a `args` argument as key-value pairs, that will be directly given to the model during initialization to allow granular control. Optional.

so the mention of param subsections is present but the (internal) intention is gone

\* - mandatory parameters.
* `class`\* (string) - model class name `"model.isolation_forest.IsolationForestMultivariateModel"`

* `contamination` - The amount of contamination of the data set, i.e. the proportion of outliers in the data set. Used when fitting to define the threshold on the scores of the samples. Default value - "auto". Should be either `"auto"` or be in the range (0.0, 0.5].

* `args`: (dict) - Inner model args (key-value pairs). See accepted params in [model documentation](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.ensemble.IsolationForest.html). Defaults to empty (not provided). Example:  {"random_state": 42, "n_estimators": 100}

*Config Example*
<div class="with-copy" markdown="1">

```yaml
model:
  # To use univariate model, substitute class argument with "model.isolation_forest.IsolationForestModel".
  class: "model.isolation_forest.IsolationForestMultivariateModel"
  contamination: "auto"
  args:
    n_estimators: 100
    # i.e. to assure reproducibility of produced results each time model is fit on the same input
    random_state: 42
```
</div>

Resulting metrics of the model are described [here](#vmanomaly-output).

---

> ## Custom model

Reviewer: My suggestion is to add custom model guide right in this place or into Guides section.

Author: agreed to intentionally leave it as is in initial version, see comments above, so we have cross-references and do not have oversized pages with many nested subsection levels

When vmanomaly is executed, it generates various metrics, the specifics of which depend on the model employed. 
These metrics can be renamed in the writer's section. 

The default metrics produced by vmanomaly include:

- `anomaly_score`: This is the *primary* metric. 
  - It is designed in such a way that values from 0.0 to 1.0 indicate non-anomalous data. 
  - A value greater than 1.0 is generally classified as an anomaly, although this threshold can be adjusted in the alerting configuration.
  - The decision to set the changepoint at 1 was made to ensure consistency across various models and alerting configurations, such that a score above 1 consistently signifies an anomaly.
  
- `yhat`: This represents the predicted expected value.

- `yhat_lower`: This indicates the predicted lower boundary.

- `yhat_upper`: This refers to the predicted upper boundary.

- `y`: This is the original value obtained from the query result.

**Important**: Be aware that if `NaN` (Not a Number) or `Inf` (Infinity) values are present in the input data during `infer` model calls, the model will produce `NaN` as the `anomaly_score` for these particular instances.

## Healthcheck metrics

> Each model exposes [several healthchecks metrics](../monitoring.html#model-behaviour-metrics) to its `health_path` endpoint: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each model exposes several healthchecks metrics. You can find the detailed description of them [here](../monitoring.html#model-behaviour-metrics). 
```
